.. index:: Internationalization, i18n

.. _section-i18n:

====================
Internationalization
====================

These are the coding conventions for NethServer i18n. Each package
repository should respect them.

* The developer prepares the translation source strings when the code
  has been written.

* Each translation catalog must be mapped to a resource on Transifex_.

* Whenever new strings are added or existing ones are changed, source
  catalogs must be pushed into Transifex with `Transifex client`_: ::

    tx push -s

* Once translators complete their work a new release of
  :ref:`nethserver-lang-module` can occur.

.. _Transifex: https://www.transifex.com/projects/p/nethserver
.. _Transifex client: http://docs.transifex.com/developer/client/

Currently both gettext and Server Manager specific formats are supported
for language catalogs.


Server Manager (Cockpit)
========================

Packages providing an application for the Cockpit Server Manager must adhere to
the guidelines documented here:

https://nethserver.github.io/nethserver-cockpit/i18n/#translations


Server Manager (Nethgui)
========================

To configure the Transifex client and find the string catalog files
execute the `txinit.sh`_ script on the repository root.
The script can run multiple times, when new catalogs are added to the repository.

.. _`txinit.sh`: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NethServer/nethserver-lang/master/txinit.sh


PHP files
---------

All source language catalog files are placed in
:file:`root/usr/share/nethesis/NethServer/Language/en`. We assume
``en`` is ``en-US``.

The catalog format is a common PHP file where the array variable
:samp:`$L` is assigned some keys: ::

  <?php

  $L['string_id_1'] = 'This is an example';
  $L['string_id_2'] = 'What is a PHP array catalog?';

1. Omit ending sequence :samp:`?>`.

2. Use UTF-8 encoding.
      
Given a module with name "Test", the source language file will be
:file:`root/usr/share/nethesis/NethServer/Language/en/NethServer_Module_Test.php`.

When the Server Manager is running in debug mode, missing translation
labels can be found in :file:`/var/log/messages`.  To enable the
debug,

* Unlock ``index_dev.php`` controller: ::
    
    touch /usr/share/nethesis/nethserver-manager/debug
    
* Prepend ``index_dev.php`` on URLs path, eg:
  :file:`https://<ipaddress>/index_dev.php/en/<module>`.



gettext files
-------------

The gettext format is used by the TODO scripts in the old Server Manager.

The ``xgettext`` command can be used to extract strings from the
source code. The resulting ``.pot`` file must be named
:file:`locale/<rpmname>.pot`.

For example we will translate a new TODO message for the web interface.

Steps to setup translation for a new todo:

1. Be sure gettext is installed in your system

2. Add the todo script to the git repository

3. Create locale directory inside the git repository root: ::

    mkdir locale/

4. Extract the strings (from a Python source code): ::

    PACKAGE=$(basename `pwd`)
    xgettext --msgid-bugs-address "translations@nethserver.org" --package-version "1.0.0"  \
    --package-name "$PACKAGE" --foreign-user -d "$PACKAGE" -o "locale/${PACKAGE}.pot" \
    -L Python root/etc/nethserver/todos.d/*

5. Run the txinit.sh script and commit newly created files into git.

6. Upload the new ``.pot`` resource to Transifex (special permissions are needed): ::

    tx push -s

